R 3.3.0
=======

<http://www.r-project.org>


Log
---

install new R version, run on milou-b

    VERSION=3.3.0

    CLUSTER=milou
    cd /sw/apps/R/x86_64
    mkdir $VERSION
    cd $VERSION
    mkdir ${CLUSTER} tintin src
    cd src
    wget http://cran.r-project.org/src/base/R-3/R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    tar xzf R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    mv R-$VERSION  R-${VERSION}-${CLUSTER}
    tar xzf R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    mv R-$VERSION  R-${VERSION}-tintin

Now for the milou build.

    cd R-${VERSION}-${CLUSTER}

R 3.3.0 has removed several libraries from its source tree.  I had to build and install modules for `xz/5.2.2` and `pcre/8.38`, tintin shared libraries for `bzip2/1.0.6`, and fix several shared library symlink versioning problems; for example, `./configure` was not recognising the presence of `bzip2/1.0.6` because it was missing a simlink `libbz2.so.1 -> libbz2.so.1.0`.  There were others.  The major clue I was able to use to track down these missing version symlinks was by building an example program built based on the test program contents shown in `config.log` at a point of failure.  If `ldd` on that program didn't show me that it was getting the shared library from the module location, then it was probably looking for a versioned name/symlink that didn't exist.

    module load libcurl/7.45.0
    module load zlib/1.2.8
    module load bzip2/1.0.6
    module load xz/5.2.2
    module load pcre/8.38
    module load gcc/4.9.2
    module load java/sun_jdk1.8.0_40

    ./configure --prefix=/sw/apps/R/x86_64/$VERSION/${CLUSTER} --with-libpng --with-jpeglib --with-cairo --enable-R-shlib --with-readline=yes

Make sure the configure finds libcurl and the others. Don't worry, it will complain if it doesn't.

    make -j 8
    make check
    make install

As for python, we prevent inadvertent package installations in the module tree by members of group `sw` with:

    chmod -R -w /sw/apps/R/x86_64/$VERSION/$CLUSTER


Repeat for tintin.


Package updates
---------------

Even though there are several commonly-used R packages (e.g., ggplot2), we don't install any beyond the base set delivered with R, for many of the same reason that we have users install their own Perl and Python packages.  I was updating my personal R library to 3.3 when I noticed several times that it was wanting to update nlme and survival.  So, I updated those in the R/3.3.0 tree.  Even without `R_LIBS_USER` set, R will try to find your personal R library and install there, so for both milou and tintin I temporarily moved `$HOME/R` to `$HOME/RR`, opened up the module tree with:

    chmod -R +w /sw/apps/R/x86_64/$VERSION/$CLUSTER/lib64/R

then loaded `R/3.3.0` and did `install.packages(c('nlme','survival'))`.  That seemed to do the trick.
