R 3.4.0
=======

<http://www.r-project.org>


Log
---

install new R version, run on milou-b

    VERSION=3.4.0

    CLUSTER=${CLUSTER:?CLUSTER must be set}
    cd /sw/apps/R/x86_64
    mkdir $VERSION
    cd $VERSION
    mkdir ${CLUSTER} src
    cd ${CLUSTER}
    PFX=$PWD
    cd ../src
    [[ -f R-$VERSION.tar.gz ]] || wget http://cran.r-project.org/src/base/R-3/R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    tar xzf R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    mv R-$VERSION  R-${VERSION}-${CLUSTER}
    cd R-${VERSION}-${CLUSTER}

Beginning with R 3.3.0, several libraries have been removed from R's source
tree.  I had to build and install modules for `xz/5.2.2` and `pcre/8.38`,
tintin shared libraries for `bzip2/1.0.6`, and fix several shared library
symlink versioning problems; for example, `./configure` was not recognising the
presence of `bzip2/1.0.6` because it was missing a simlink `libbz2.so.1 ->
libbz2.so.1.0`.  There were others.  The major clue I was able to use to track
down these missing version symlinks was by building an example program built
based on the test program contents shown in `config.log` at a point of failure.
If `ldd` on that program didn't show me that it was getting the shared library
from the module location, then it was probably looking for a versioned
name/symlink that didn't exist.

    module load gcc/6.2.0
    module load java/sun_jdk1.8.0_92
    module load libcurl/7.45.0
    module load zlib/1.2.8
    module load bzip2/1.0.6
    module load xz/5.2.2
    module load pcre/8.40
    module load cairo/1.14.8
    module load texlive/2016
    module load texinfo/6.0

### For all systems

Loading the pcre/8.40 module will provide a module that has JIT set, and also provides a PCRE_ROOT variable. 
Make sure that PCRE_ROOT is set to /sw/libs/pcre/8.40/milou after having loaded pcre/8.40 . 
 
	SHLIB_LDFLAGS=-L$PCRE_ROOT/lib ./configure --prefix=$PFX --with-libpng --with-jpeglib --with-cairo --enable-R-shlib --with-readline=yes 

Note that setting an environment variable prior to running a command places that variable in the command's environment only.

There also must be a change made to an R source file which must be done
**after** the `./configure` has run.  In `src/main/complex.c`, after the `#if 0/#endif` block from lines 33-50, add a line `#undef HAVE_CTANH` so that the R version of `ctanh` is used.  This is to get around a bug on milou, but for consistency we should use the same functions on both, for the same version of R.

Once this fix is done, the build may proceed.


### continuing ...

Make sure the configure finds libcurl and the others. Don't worry, it will
complain if it doesn't.

    make -j 8
    make check

The `make check` might fail a PDF-rendering test.  It will on milou, for sure.
Then just continue with `make check-recommended`  which will test the
recommended libraries, there should definitely be no failures there.

    make install

## Wrapping up

Do fixup!

    [[ ! -z "$PFX" ]] && fixup -g $PFX || echo "PFX is not set"

As for python, we prevent inadvertent package installations in the module tree
by members of group `sw` with:

    [[ ! -z "$PFX" ]] && chmod -R -w $PFX || echo "PFX is not set"


