R/3.5.2
=======

<http://www.r-project.org>


LOG
---

Install new R version.

The latest texlive is still 2018, the latest texinfo is still 6.5, and the
latest cairo is 1.16.0, with the previous release being 1.14.12, the one we
currently have.  Leaving all these tools at their current releases.

The only tool-version change I am making is updating gcc to be `gcc/7.4.0`, to
provide access to c++17 features.

    VERSION=3.5.2

    CLUSTER=${CLUSTER:?CLUSTER must be set}
    cd /sw/apps/R/x86_64
    mkdir $VERSION
    cd $VERSION
    mkdir ${CLUSTER} src
    [[ "$CLUSTER" == "rackham" ]] && for CL in irma bianca snowy ; do ln -s $CLUSTER $CL; done
    cd ${CLUSTER}
    PFX=$PWD
    cd ../src
    [[ -f R-$VERSION.tar.gz ]] || wget http://cran.r-project.org/src/base/R-3/R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    tar xzf R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    cd R-${VERSION}

    module load gcc/7.4.0
    module load java/sun_jdk1.8.0_151
    module load cairo/1.14.12
    module load texlive/2018
    module load texinfo/6.5

	./configure --prefix=$PFX --with-libpng --with-jpeglib --with-cairo --enable-R-shlib --with-readline=yes 

### continuing ...

Make sure the configure finds libcurl and everything else. Don't worry, it will
complain if it doesn't.

    make -j 10
    make check

There is a failure in 'running code in 'reg-plot-latin1.R' ... FAILED'.  This
same error, in previous R versions, still exists in this one.  Character set
issues, undoubtedly.  There is also one "NOTE" about an error printed with
double-quotes vs single-quotes. Continuing.

    make check-recommended

which will test the recommended libraries, there should definitely be no
failures there.  There were two NOTEs, one about missing gam package.

    make install

## Wrapping up

Remove the source tree.

    cd ..
    rm -rf R-${VERSION}

Do fixup.

    [[ ! -z "$PFX" ]] && fixup -g $PFX || echo "PFX is not set"

We no longer need to write-protect the package tree (right?), since we don't set
`R_LIBS_USER`.


