R/3.5.0
=======

<http://www.r-project.org>


LOG
---

Install new R version, run on rackham5.

With the permanent move to CentOS7, we are leaving milou-b behind.  This means
a lot of libraries are probably at suitable versions by default on the system.
Something to keep an eye on in any event.

Took the opportunity to install cairo/1.14.12, texlive/2018 and texinfo/6.5.

    VERSION=3.5.0

    CLUSTER=${CLUSTER:?CLUSTER must be set}
    cd /sw/apps/R/x86_64
    mkdir $VERSION
    cd $VERSION
    mkdir ${CLUSTER} src
    [[ "$CLUSTER" == "rackham" ]] && for CL in irma bianca ; do ln -s $CLUSTER $CL; done
    cd ${CLUSTER}
    PFX=$PWD
    cd ../src
    [[ -f R-$VERSION.tar.gz ]] || wget http://cran.r-project.org/src/base/R-3/R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    tar xzf R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    cd R-${VERSION}

    module load gcc/6.3.0
    module load java/sun_jdk1.8.0_151
    module load cairo/1.14.12
    module load texlive/2018
    module load texinfo/6.5

	./configure --prefix=$PFX --with-libpng --with-jpeglib --with-cairo --enable-R-shlib --with-readline=yes 

### continuing ...

Make sure the configure finds libcurl and everything else. Don't worry, it will
complain if it doesn't.

    make -j 10
    make check

There is a failure in 'running code in 'reg-plot-latin1.R' ... FAILED'.
Character set issues, undoubtedly.  Continuing.

    make check-recommended

which will test the recommended libraries, there should definitely be no
failures there.

    make install

## Wrapping up

Remove the source tree.

    cd ..
    rm -rf R-${VERSION}

Do fixup, and as for python, we prevent inadvertent package installations in
the module tree by members of group `sw` with:

    [[ ! -z "$PFX" ]] && fixup -g $PFX || echo "PFX is not set"


