R/4.2.1
========================

<https://www.r-project.org>

Used under license:
GPL v2


Structure creating script (makeroom_R_4.2.1.sh) moved to /sw/apps/R/makeroom_4.2.1.sh

LOG
---

    /home/douglas/bin/makeroom.sh "-f" "-t" "R" "-v" "4.2.1" "-c" "apps" "-w" "https://www.r-project.org" "-d" "free software environment for statistical computing and graphics" "-l" "GPL v2"
    ./makeroom_R_4.2.1.sh


    source /sw/apps/R/SOURCEME_R_4.2.1 && cd $SRCDIR


o Use `gcc/10.3.0`

x For now, stick with `java/sun_jdk1.8.0_151`

x The most recent installed `cairo/1.17.4` is the most recent available

x The most recent installed texlive is `texlive/2021`, so update it to `texlive/2022-09-18`

x The most recent installed texinfo/6.8 is the most recent available

o The most recent installed libcurl is `libcurl/7.45.0`, so update it to `libcurl/7.85.0`

x The most recent installed Tcl-Tk/8.6.11 is the most recent available

x Initiate the use of `readline/6.2-11`

x Initiate the use of `libicu/5.2-4`

Switching to `gcc/10.3.0` for R 4.2.x. Use `Tcl-Tk/8.6.11` for its internal tcltk package.


    [[ -f R-$VERSION.tar.gz ]] || wget http://cran.r-project.org/src/base/R-4/R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    tar xf R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    cd R-${VERSION}
    module load gcc/10.3.0
    module load java/sun_jdk1.8.0_151
    module load cairo/1.17.4
    module load texlive/2022-09-18
    module load texinfo/6.8
    module load libcurl/7.85.0
    module load Tcl-Tk/8.6.11
    module load readline/6.2-11
    module load libicu/5.2-4
    ./configure --prefix=$PREFIX --with-libpng --with-jpeglib --with-libtiff --with-cairo --enable-R-shlib --with-readline=yes --with-x --with-tcltk=$TCL_TK_ROOT/lib --with-tcl-config=$TCL_TK_ROOT/../src/tcl8.6.11/unix/tclConfig.sh --with-tk-config=$TCL_TK_ROOT/../src/tk8.6.11/unix/tkConfig.sh


### continuing ...

Make sure the configure finds libcurl and everything else. Don't worry, it will
complain if it doesn't.

    make -j 10
    make check
    make check-recommended

which will test the recommended libraries, there should definitely be no
failures there.  There were several NOTEs about not being able to check .o
files, (nnet, mgcv, spatial, etc.)

    make install


## Wrapping up

Remove the source tree.

    cd ..
    rm -rf R-${VERSION}

Do fixup.

    cd $TOOLDIR
    ./R-4.2.1_post-install.sh

We no longer need to write-protect the package tree (right?), since we don't set
`R_LIBS_USER`.

The mf tree needs to load gcc, java, cairo, texlive, texinfo, libcurl with the above versions.


## Additional issues with miarka usage: 2022-03-31

The libreadine and libicu* libraries are updated on miarka with no compat
packages available.  So, I created readline/6.2-11 and libicu/5.2-4 modules and
adjusted the RPATH of libR.so to use these, as well as adding their load to the
mf.

