R/4.1.1
=======

<https://www.r-project.org>

Used under license:
GPL v2


Structure creating script (makeroom_R_4.1.1.sh) moved to /sw/apps/R/makeroom_4.1.1.sh

There's an intervening directory here, `x68_64/`, between toolname and version, for previous R installations. Let's not use that for 4.1.1 and see if it makes a difference.

LOG
---

    makeroom.sh -f -t "R" -v "4.1.1" -c "apps" -w "https://www.r-project.org" -d "free software environment for statistical computing and graphics" -l "GPL v2"
    ./makeroom_R_4.1.1.sh
    cd /sw/apps/R

    source SOURCEME_R_4.1.1
    cd $SRCDIR

The latest texlive is 2021, the latest texinfo is 6.8, and the latest cairo
installed at UPPMAX is 1.17.4.  I am also updating gcc to be `gcc/9.3.0`, and
forcing R to use Tcl-Tk/8.6.11 for its internal tcltk package.

    [[ -f R-$VERSION.tar.gz ]] || wget http://cran.r-project.org/src/base/R-4/R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    tar xf R-$VERSION.tar.gz
    cd R-${VERSION}
    module load gcc/9.3.0
    module load java/sun_jdk1.8.0_151
    module load cairo/1.17.4
    module load texlive/2021
    module load texinfo/6.8
    module load libcurl/7.45.0
    module load Tcl-Tk/8.6.11
    ./configure --prefix=$PREFIX --with-libpng --with-jpeglib --with-libtiff --with-cairo --enable-R-shlib --with-readline=yes --with-x --with-tcltk=$TCL_TK_ROOT/lib --with-tcl-config=$TCL_TK_ROOT/../src/tcl8.6.11/unix/tclConfig.sh --with-tk-config=$TCL_TK_ROOT/../src/tk8.6.11/unix/tkConfig.sh

### continuing ...

Make sure the configure finds libcurl and everything else. Don't worry, it will
complain if it doesn't.

    make -j 10
    make check
    make check-recommended

which will test the recommended libraries, there should definitely be no
failures there.  There were several NOTEs about not being able to check .o
files, (nnet, mgcv, spatial, etc.)

    make install

## Wrapping up

Remove the source tree.

    cd ..
    rm -rf R-${VERSION}

Do fixup.

    cd $TOOLDIR
    ./R-4.1.1_post-install.sh

We no longer need to write-protect the package tree (right?), since we don't set
`R_LIBS_USER`.

The mf tree needs to load gcc, java, cairo, texlive, texinfo, libcurl with the above versions.
